		 CSE-506 (Spring 2012) Homework Assignment #1
			      Handout number 3
		  (100 points, 12% of your overall grade)
			   Version 3 (2/3/2012)
		       Due Sunday 2/19/2012 @ 11:59pm

* PURPOSE:

To get your Linux kernel development environment working; to make small
changes to the kernel and test them out; to learn about system calls.

* BACKGROUND:

Encrypting files is very useful and important nowadays, but Linux does not
support this feature natively (yet).  Your task is to create a new system
call that can take an input file, encrypt or decrypt it, and then produce an
output file.

Note that while we give you more details below, it is up to you to inspect
the kernel sources to find out similar helpful examples of code; those will
provide you with even greater details than what we provide here.

The expected amount of written code for this assignment would be 300-500
lines of kernel code, and another 100-200 lines of user-level code.  Note,
however, that a lot of time may be spent reading existing sources and
debugging the code you write.

* TASK:

Create a Linux kernel module (in vanilla 3.2.y Linux that's in your HW1					Done
GIT repository) that, when loaded into Linux, will support a new system call
called

	sys_xcrypt(infile, outfile, keybuf, keylen, flags)						Done

where "infile" is the name of an input file to encrypt or decrypt, "outfile"
is the output file, "keybuf" is a buffer holding the cipher key, "keylen" is
the length of that buffer, and "flags" determine if you're encrypting or
decrypting.

If the low (LSB) bit of flags is 1, you should encrypt the infile.  If the
LSB is 0, you should decrypt the infile.								Done

An unencrypted (cleartext) file is just a sequence of arbitrary bytes.  An
encrypted (ciphertext) file has two sections.  The first section is a fixed
length "preamble" and contains some information to validate the decryption
key (e.g., a secure hash/checksum of the user-level pass-phrase).  This first
section may include other information as you see fit (e.g., original file
size, and stuff for extra-credit).  The second section is just the input
file data, encrypted as per the cipher block size, cipher key, etc.					Done

The most important thing system calls do first is ensure the validity of the
input they are given.  You must check for ALL possible bad conditions that
could occur as the result of bad inputs to the system call.  In that case,
the system call should return the proper errno value (EINVAL, EPERM, EACCES,
etc.)  Consult the system errno table and pick the right error numbers for
different conditions.											Done

The kinds of errors that could occur early during the system call's
execution are as follows (this is a non-exhaustive list):

- missing arguments passed										
- null arguments											Done
- pointers to bad addresses										
- len and buf don't match										Done
- invalid flags												Done
- input file cannot be opened or read									Done
- output file cannot be opened or written								Done
- input or output files are not regular, or they point to the same file					Done
- trying to decrypt a file w/ the wrong key (what errno should you return?)
- ANYTHING else you can think of (the more error checking you do, the better)
- Error check for writing to existing file								Done

After checking for these errors, you should open the input and output files
and begin copying data between the two, encrypting or decrypting the data
before it is written.  Your code must be efficient.  Therefore, do not waste
extra kernel memory (dynamic or stack) for the system call.  Make sure
you're not leaking any memory.  On the other hand, for efficiency, you
should copy the data in chunks that are native to the system this code is
compiled on, the system page size (PAGE_CACHE_SIZE or PAGE_SIZE).  Hint:
allocate one page as temporary buffer.									Done

Note that the last page you write could be partially filled and that your				
code should handle zero length files as well.								Done

Also note that ciphers have a native block size (e.g., 64 bit) and your file 
may have to be padded to the
cipher block size.  Lastly, certain ciphers/modes don't care about blocking
sizes so they won't need padding. The padding scheme you should use must work
under all circumstances (e.g., padding with zeros doesn't work, because zeros
are a valid input file).

The output file should be created with the user/group ownership of the					Done
running process, and its protection mode should NOT be less than the input
file.

Both the input and output files may be specified using relative or absolute
pathnames.  Do not assume that the files are always in the current working				Done
directory.

If no error occurred, sys_xcrypt() should return 0 to the calling process.
If an error occurred, it should return -1 and ensure that errno is set for
the calling process.  Choose your errno's appropriately.						Done

If an error occurred in trying to write some of the output file, the system
call should NOT produce a partial output file.  Instead, remove any
partially-written output file and return the appropriate error code.					Done

Write a C program called "xcipher" that will call your syscall.  The program
should have no output upon success and use perror() to print out information
about what errors occurred.  The program should take three arguments:

- flag: -e to encrypt; -d to decrypt
- flag: -c ARG to specify the type of xcipher (as a string name)
  [Note: this flag is mainly for the extra credit part]
- flag: -p ARG to specify the encryption/decryption key
- flag: -h to provide a helpful usage message
- input file name
- output file name											Done

You can process options using getopt(3).  (Note that specifying the
password on the command line is highly insecure, but it'd make grading
easier.  In reality, one would use getpass(3) to input a password.)  You
should be able to execute the following command:

	./xcipher -p "this is my password" -e infile outfile						Done

User-level passwords should be at least 6 characters long.  Nevertheless, you
should not just pass the password into the kernel as is: it is too short.
You need to ensure that you pass a correctly sized encryption key into the
kernel.  You should remove any newline character ('\n'), and then convert
the human readable password into a good length key.  Use a cryptographic
checksum algorithm such as MD5(3) or SHA1(3) to generate a good key to pass
to the kernel.  An even better way would be to use a PKCS#5 library to
generate secure hashes (check "man -k pkcs" for more info).

* SYSTEM CALLS IN Linux Kernel 3.x:

As of kernel 2.6, a kernel module is not allowed to override system calls
(long story, I'll tell you in class :-) You will have to find a way to add
system calls in a clean way to your kernel, such that it works for every
architecture.  Ideally, the new syscall should use an unused system call
number.

* USING THE CIPHERS:

You should perform all of your encryption in Cipher Block Chaining (CBC) mode
on whole pages (4KB on Linux x86).

Use the Linux kernel built-in CryptoAPI.  To learn how to use it, see the
kernel documentation that comes with the CryptoAPI option.  You don't need
to be an expert in security or encryption to do this assignment.  Part of
what this assignment will teach you is how to work with someone else's code,
even if all you understand is the API to that code (and not the internals).

For this assignment, use the AES cipher only (i.e., hard-code it in your
kernel code).  (But see the Extra Credit section below.)

* READING FILES FROM INSIDE THE KERNEL

Here's an example function that can open a file from inside the kernel, read
some data off of it, then close it.  This will help you in this assignment.
You can easily extrapolate from this how to write data to another file.
(Warning: the code below is from 2.4.  Adapt it as needed.)

/*
 * Read "len" bytes from "filename" into "buf".
 * "buf" is in kernel space.
 */
int
wrapfs_read_file(const char *filename, void *buf, int len)
{
    struct file *filp;
    mm_segment_t oldfs;
    int bytes;
    				/* Chroot? Maybe NULL isn't right here */
    filp = filp_open(filename, O_RDONLY, 0);
    if (!filp || IS_ERR(filp)) {
	printk("wrapfs_read_file err %d\n", (int) PTR_ERR(filp));
	return -1;  /* or do something else */
    }

    if (!filp->f_op->read)
	return -2;  /* file(system) doesn't allow reads */

    /* now read len bytes from offset 0 */
    filp->f_pos = 0;		/* start offset */
    oldfs = get_fs();
    set_fs(KERNEL_DS);
    bytes = filp->f_op->read(filp, buf, len, &filp->f_pos);
    set_fs(oldfs);

    /* close the file */
    filp_close(filp, NULL);

    return bytes;
}

* TESTING YOUR CODE:

You may choose to hard-code the syscall into your kernel, or do it as a
loadable kernel module (loadable kernel modules makes it easier to
unload/reload a new version of the code).  Write user-level code to test
your program carefully.

If you choose a kernel module, then once your module is loaded, the new
system call behavior should exist, and you can run your program on various
input files.  Check that each error condition you coded for works as it
should.  Check that the modified file is changed correctly.

Finally, although you may develop your code on any Linux machine, we will
test your code using the same Virtual Machine distribution (with all
officially released patches applied as of the date this assignment is
released), and using the Linux 3.2.y kernel.  It is YOUR responsibility
to ensure that your code runs well under these conditions.  We will NOT test
or demo your code on your own machine or laptop!  So please plan your work
accordingly to allow yourself enough time to test your code on the machines
for which we have given you a login account (these are the same exact
machines we will test your code on when we grade it).

Additionally, you strongly suggest that you enable CONFIG_DEBUG_SLAB and
other useful debugging features under the "Kernel hacking" configuration
menu.  When grading the homework, we will use a kernel tuned for
debugging---which may expose bugs in your code that you can't easily catch
without debugging support.  So it's better for YOU to have caught and fixed
those bugs before we do.

Lastly, note that even if your system call appears to work well, it's
possible that you've corrupted some memory state in the kernel, and you may
not notice the impact until much later.  If your code begins behaving
strangely after having worked better before, consider rebooting your VM.

* STYLE AND MORE:

Aside from testing the proper functionality of your code, we will also
carefully evaluate the quality of your code.  Be sure to use a consistent
style, well documented, and break your code into separate functions and/or
source files as it makes sense.

To be sure your code is very clean, it should compile with "gcc -Wall
-Werror" without any errors or warnings!  We'll deduct points for any
warning that we feel should be easy to fix.

Read Documentation/CodingStyle to understand which coding style is preferred
in the kernel and stick to it for this assignment.  Run your kernel code
through the syntax checker in scripts/checkpatch.pl (with the "strict"
option turned on), and fix every warning that comes up.  Cleaner code tends
to be less buggy.

If the various sources you use require common definitions, then do not
duplicate the definitions.  Make use of C's code-sharing facilities such as
common header files.

You must include a README file with this and any assignment. The
README file should briefly describe what you did, what approach you
took, results of any measurements you might have made, which files are
included in your submission and what they are for, etc.  Feel free to
include any other information you think is helpful to us in this README; it
can only help your grade (esp. for Extra Credit).

* SUBMISSION

You will need to submit all of your sources, headers, scripts, Makefiles,
and README.  Submit all of your files using GIT.  See general GIT submission
guidelines on the class Web site.

As part of this assignment, you should also build a 3.2.y kernel that's
as small as you can get (but without breaking the normal CentOS boot).  For
example, there are dozens of file systems available: you need at least ext3
and nfs (client), but you don't need XFS o Reiserfs.  Commit your .config
kernel file into GIT, but rename it "kernel.config".  We will grade you on
how small your kernel configuration is with the following exceptions:

1. All start time servers that run by default in the VM provided, should
   start without failing.

2. We won't count "kernel hacking" options: so you may enable as many of
   them as you'd like.

To submit new files, create a directory named "hw1" inside hw1-<user>
directory that you checked out. Remember to git add, commit, and push this
new directory. Put all new files that you add in this directory. This may
include user space program (.c and .h files), README, kernel files (in case
you are implementing system call as a loadable kernel module), Makefile,
kernel.config, or anything else you deem appropriate.

For existing kernel source to which you make modification, use git
add, commit, and push as mentioned on class web site.

There must be a Makefile in hw1/ directory. Doing a "make" in hw1/
should accomplish the following:

1. Compile user space program to produce an executable by the name
   "xcipher".  This will be used to test your system call.

2. In case you are implementing system call as a loadable kernel module, the
   "make" command should also produce a sys_xcrypt.ko file which can be
   insmod into the kernel.

(Use gcc -Wall -Werror in makefile commands.  We will anyway add them if you
don't :-)

The hw1/ directory should also contain a "kernel.config" file which will be
used to bring up your kernel.

Note that in case you are implementing system call directly in the kernel
code (and not as a loadable kernel module), then just compiling and
installing your kernel should activate the system call.

Just to give you an idea how we will grade your submission: We will check
out your git repository.  We will use kernel.config file in hw1/
subdirectory to compile and then install your kernel.  We will then do a
make in hw1/ subdirectory.  If your implementation is based on a loadable
module, we will expect sys_xcrypt.ko to be present in hw1/ after doing a
make.  We will then insmod it and use hw1/xcipher (also generated as part of
make) to test your system call on various inputs.  Note that insmod step
will be skipped in case you implement system call directly into the kernel.

PLEASE test your submission before submitting it, by doing a dry run of
above steps. DO NOT make the common mistake of writing code until the very
last minute, and then trying to figure out how to use GIT and skipping the
testing of what you submitted.  You will lose valuable points if you do not
get to submit on time or if you submission is incomplete!!!

Make sure that you follow above submission guidelines strictly.  We *will*
deduct points for not following this instructions precisely.

* EXTRA CREDIT (OPTIONAL, total 20 points)

If you do any of the extra credit work, then your EC code must be wrapped in

	#ifdef EXTRA_CREDIT
		// EC code here
	#else
		// base assignment code here
	#endif

[A] 4 points.

Augment your module to utilize the Initialization Vector (IV) part of the
xcipher.  Without having to know much about the IV, it is useful to
understand that setting it to a different value each time you encrypt or
decrypt a chunk of bytes produces stronger encryption that is harder to
break.  A common way to set the 8 bytes of the IV is as follows:

- first 8 bytes are the index of the page (or page number) that you are
  encrypting or decrypting (e.g., on an i386 system with a 4096-byte page
  size, bytes 0-4095 are in page 0, bytes 4096-8191 are in page 1, etc.).

- set the remaining 8 bytes to the inode number of the file.

Note: Your first IV information (assuming you "chain" them) should be stored
in the cipher file preamble.

[B] 6 points

Support multiple ciphers.  You should pass the cipher name as a string using
the "-c ARG" option.  Change the system call to accept an extra argument at
the end called "char *cipher".  This variable should be a constant string,
null terminated, whose value can be one of: "blowfish" for the Blowfish
cipher; "des" for DES; "des3_ede" for Triple DES; etc.  The type of cipher
must always be specified and must always be a valid cipher that the Linux
kernel CryptoAPI understands.  All kernel-supported ciphers should be
allowed; return EINVAL if the user specifies an invalid cipher name.  The
cipher name (or ID) should also be stored in the preamble.

[C] 5 points.

Support multiple encryption unit sizes and key lengths.  You will have to
augment the system call as needed to pass the new info, and the user-level
tool.  For example:

	$ ./xcipher -u 16000 -l 256 -e infile outfile

where -l specifies the key length to 256 bits, and -u specifies that the
encryption unit should be in whole chunks of 16000 bytes (instead of the
default 4KB).  If not specified, -u should default to PAGE_SIZE, and -l to
128 bits.  Note that the argument to -l can be any valid key length that the
cipher accepts (for example, Blowfish can't use keys smaller than 128 bits);
however, the argument to -u can be ANY positive number that the cipher will
accept (even odd numbers).

Good luck.

* Change History:

1/31: updated to use kernel 3.2.x.
2/3: clarify loadable module; fix typo in EC ifdef.
